feat(sql): Add support for dropping symbol column index (#876)
questdb/questdb.io: docs/reference/sql/alter-table-alter-column-drop-index.md

---
title: ALTER TABLE COLUMN DROP INDEX
sidebar_label: DROP INDEX
description: DROP INDEX SQL keyword reference documentation.
---

Removes an existing index from a column of type [symbol](/docs/concept/symbol).

> 

Author: hola, nope. This operation is equivalent to `update table tab column=column` where column is a symbol column that has an index before the operation, an no index afterwards. Readers of the table might be using the index in txn A, and they can happily carry on doing that while a writer creates txn B containing the new version of the column, minus the index (metadata is set to not have index, and the files are not copied across to the newer version).

> 

Author: I have amended the documentation to explain this, I am sure there will be readers wondering.

---
title: ALTER TABLE COLUMN DROP INDEX
sidebar_label: DROP INDEX
description: DROP INDEX SQL keyword reference documentation.
---

> Removes and existing index from a column of type `symbol`.

Author: done

Removing an index is an atomic, non-blocking and non-waiting operation. Once
complete, the SQL optimizer will stop using the index for SQL executions and 
all its associated files are deleted.

:::info

For more information about indexes please refer to the
[INDEX documentation](/docs/concept/indexes)

:::

## Syntax

> ![Flow chart showing the syntax of the ALTER TABLE keyword](/img/docs/diagrams/alterTable.svg)

Reviewer: this diagram feels misplaced, pls check the preview

Author: I have regenerated the image to make it clear

---
title: ALTER TABLE COLUMN DROP INDEX
sidebar_label: DROP INDEX
description: DROP INDEX SQL keyword reference documentation.
---

Removes an existing index from a column of type [symbol](/docs/concept/symbol).

Removing an index is an atomic, non-blocking and non-waiting operation. Once

> complete, the SQL optimizer will stop using the index for SQL executions and 

Reviewer 2: nit: "engine" is better fit here
```suggestion
complete, the SQL engine will stop using the index for SQL executions and 
```

> Removing an index is an atomic, non-blocking and non-waiting operation. Once
> complete, the SQL optimizer will stop using the index for SQL executions and 
> all its associated files are deleted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Removing an index is an atomic, non-blocking, and non-waiting operation. Once
the operation is completed, the SQL optimizer stops using the index for SQL executions and 
all its associated files are deleted.
```

> This operation is equivalent to `update table tab set column=column`, where

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This operation is equivalent to `UPDATE tab SET column = column`, where
```

> This operation is equivalent to `update table tab set column=column`, where

Author: I have taken this approach, except I am not going to link UPDATE. This drop index op is similar to update, but not the same, so linking to update might distract the reader?

column is a symbol column that has an index before the operation, an no index

> afterwards. Readers of the table might be using the index in txn A, and they

Reviewer 2: We should be using "transaction" instead of the in-house "txn"

> afterwards. Readers of the table might be using the index in txn A, and they

Reviewer 3: Is this a file name? Should it be:
```suggestion
afterwards. Readers of the table might be using the index in `txn A`, and they
```

Applies to later cases too.

Author: txn -> transaction, so now making it stand out makes less sense.

can carry on doing so while a writer creates txn B containing the new version 
of the column, minus the index (metadata is set to not have index, and the 
files are not copied across to the newer version). When the readers are finished, 
QuestDB automatically deletes all the files pertaining to the version of the 

> column in txn A (we use hardlinks internally to avoid an actual copy operation 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
column in txn A (QuestDB uses hardlinks internally to avoid an actual copy operation 
```

---
title: ALTER TABLE COLUMN DROP INDEX
sidebar_label: DROP INDEX
description: DROP INDEX SQL keyword reference documentation.
---

Removes an existing index from a column of type [symbol](/docs/concept/symbol).

Removing an index is an atomic, non-blocking, and non-waiting operation. Once
the operation is completed, the SQL engine stops using the index for SQL 
executions, and all its associated files are deleted.

This operation is similar to:

```sql
UPDATE tab SET column=column;
```

> Where `column` is a symbol column that has an index before the operation, an no 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Where `column` is a symbol column that has an index before the operation, and no 
```

index afterwards. Readers of the table might be using the index in transaction A, 

> and they can carry on doing so while a writer creates transaction B containing the 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in the meantime, a writer creates transaction B containing the 
```
I am not sure about this but in the original version, it is not super clear who "they" are (readers?).
